LOOMS IN WASHINGTON OVER FILLING
KEY FEDERAL JUDGESHIPS.
THE PRESIDENT SET THINGS IN
MOTION TODAY WITH HIS NOMINEES
TO TAKE SEATS ON ONE KEY APPEALS
COURT.
>> WHAT I AM DOING TODAY MY JOB.
I NEED THE SENATE TO DO ITS JOB.
>> Brown: PRESIDENT OBAMA LASHED
OUT AT SENATE REPUBLICANS TODAY
FOR PLAYING POLITICS IN DELAYING
VOTES ON PAST JUDICIAL
NOMINATIONS.
HE DID SO AT A WHITE HOUSE ROSE
GARDEN EVENT ANNOUNCING THREE
NOMINEES TO FILL V COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA CIRCUIT.
IT'S OFTEN REFERRED TO AS THE
NATION'S SECOND HIGHEST COURT
RULING ON HIGH PROFILE CASES OF
NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE.
>> TIME AND AGAIN CONGRESSIONAL
REPUBLICANS CYNICALLY USED
SENATE RULES AND PROCEDURES TO
DELAY AND EVEN BLOCK QUALIFIED
NOMINEES FROM COMING TO A FULL
VOTE.
AS A RESULT, MY JUDICIAL
NOMINEES HAVE WAITED THREE TIMES
LONGER THE TO RECEIVE
CONFIRMATION VOTES THAN THOSE OF
MY REPUBLICAN PREDECESSOR.
SO THIS IS NOT ABOUT PRINCIPLED
OPPOSITION, THIS IS ABOUT
POLITICAL OBSTRUCTION.
>> Brown: TODAY MARKED THE FIRST
TIME THE PRESIDENT HAS HELD AN
EVENT TO ANNOUNCE NOMINEES TO
ANY BENCH OTHER THAN THE SUPREME
COURT.
HIS CHOICES INCLUDE PATRICIA ANN
MILLETT, A D.C. APPELLATE LAWYER
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY LAW
PROFESSOR CORNELIA PILLARD, AND
U.S. DISTRICT COURT JUDGE ROBERT
LEON WILKINS.
THE NOMINATIONS COME AS SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER HARRY REID WAS
THREATENING TO CHANGE SENATE
PROCEDURE TO ELIMINATE JUDICIAL
FILIBUSTERS.
TODAY, THOUGH, MINORITY LEADER
MITCH McCONNELL WARNED
REPUBLICANS WON'T GO DOWN
WITHOUT A FIGHT.
>> WE DON'T INTEND TO BE
INTIMIDATED BY HIM WITH A
CONSTANT THREAT TO BREAK THE
RULES IN ORDER TO CHANGE THE
RULES.
IF THAT'S WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
WE WANT TO KNOW IT NOW, NOT SOME
OTHER TIME.
NOW.
>> Reporter: WNYC REPORTERED TO
SWIL LICK.
>> BY NAMING ALL THREE
NOMINATIONS NOW, PRESIDENT OBAMA
IS TEAMING UP WITH MAJORITY
LEADER HARRY REID.
HE'S SAYING "HERE ARE MY THREE
JUDGES" AND INCREASING THE
PRESSURE ON MITCH McCONNELL AND
SENATE REPUBLICANS TO GIVE THESE
NOMINEES UP OR DOWN VOTES OR
EXPLAIN WHY THEY WON'T.
>> Brown: LAST MONTH THE SENATE
UNANIMOUSLY APPROVED ONE OF THE
PRESIDENT'S NOMINEES TO THE D.C.
CIRCUIT.
IT WAS THE FIRST CONFIRMATION TO
THAT COURT IN SEVEN YEARS.
THE HEAT.
>> Brown: THE HEATED DEBATE GOES
BEYOND THE CAPITOL TO GROUPS WHO
CLOSELY FOLLOW COURTS AND THE
JUDICIAL PROCESS.
WE'RE JOINED BY CAROLINE
FREDRICKSON, PRESIDENT OF THE
AMERICAN CONSTITUTION SOCIETY
FOR LAW AND POLICY.
SHE WAS AT THE WHITE HOUSE
TODAY.
AND CARRIE SEVERINO, CHIEF
COUNSEL AND POLICY DIRECTOR OF
THE JUDICIAL CRISIS NETWORK,
WHICH IS CRITICAL OF THE
PRESIDENT'S ACTIONS.
WE WELCOME BOTH OF YOU.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Brown: CAROLINE FREDERICK SON
YOUR GROUP PUSHED THE WHITE
HOUSE TO MAKE THE NOMINATION,
ALL THREE AT ONE TIME.
WHY WAS IT SO IMPORTANT?
>> WELL, THAT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT COURT.
THIS IS ONE OF THE COURTS THAT
PEOPLE SAY VERY FREQUENTLY IS
SECOND ONLY TO THE SUPREME COURT
AND IN SOME WAYS IT'S ACTUALLY
AS IMPORTANT OR MORE SO BECAUSE
IT DECIDES SO MANY MORE CASES.
AND THE KIND OF CASES THAT GO TO
THE D.C. CIRCUIT ARE SOME OF THE
MOST SIGNIFICANT IN OUR COUNTRY,
INCLUDING MAJOR AGENCY APPEALS,
SOME OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS,
HEALTH CARE, FINANCIAL
REGULATIONS, WORKERS' RIGHTS,
VOTING, NATIONAL SECURITY, YOU
NAME IT.
THE MOST IMPORTANT CASES GO TO
THE D.C. CIRCUIT AND IT'S
CRITICAL THAT IT CAN OPERATE AT
FULL CAPACITY SO THAT OUR
NATION'S JUSTICE CAN BE DONE.
>> Brown: CARRIE ZEF REE KNOW,
ONE PROMINENT REPUBLICAN SENATOR
CHARLES GRASSLEY, HAS CRITICIZED
THE PRESIDENT FOR WHAT HE TERMED
PACKING THE COURT.
EXPLAIN WHY FILLING THE VACANCYS
IS PACKING THE COURT.
>> EXACTLY.
IT'S AN INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT
COURT BUT THE PRESIDENT IS IN A
SITUATION WHERE THERE ARE
NUMEROUS FEDERAL EMERGENCIES ON
THE BENCH, THERE'S A LOT OF
VACANCYS THAT AREN'T DONE.
INSTEAD OF FILLING THEM HE HAS
70% OF THE VACANCIES RIGHT NOW.
HE'S FOCUSED ON THE D.C.
POLITICAL CIRCUIT.
IT'S POLITICAL BECAUSE HIS
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENDA WILL BE
COMING THROUGH THAT COURT.
RIGHT NOW THE COURT IS PERFECTLY
BALANCED AT FOUR REPUBLICAN AND
FOUR DEMOCRATIC NOMINEES AND HAS
ONE OF THE LOWEST CASELOADS IN
THE COUNTRY.
I CLERKED IN THE D.C. CIRCUIT, I
CAN SAY FROM EXPERIENCE IT'S A
LOW CASELOAD.
THEY END UP CANCELING HEARINGS
BECAUSE THEY -- SITINGS BECAUSE
THEY DON'T HAVE CASES TO FILL
THEM.
SO IF YOU FOCUS ON THE PLACES
WHERE THERE ARE JUDICIAL
EMERGENCIES, NOT TRYING TO FILL
UP THE D.C. CIRCUIT SO IT WILL
RUBBER STAMP HIS AGENDA.
>> Brown: OKAY, SEVERAL THINGS
IN THAT RESPONSE.
>> I'VE HEARD THIS ARGUMENT MANY
TIMESS, IT'S SORT OF ORWELLIAN
IN MANY WAYS BECAUSE THE REASONS
WHY THE VACANCIES EXIST IN THE
OTHER COURT IS BECAUSE
REPUBLICANS IN THE SENATE HAVE
BEEN DELAYING SO LONG.
THEY DELAY ON THE FRONT END.
THEY DON'T SEND DISTRICT COURT
NOMINEES TO THE WHITE HOUSE.
THEY DELAY WHEN THEY DON'T SEND
THEIR BLUE SLIPS-- TECHNICAL
TERM ABOUT THE SENATE TO SENATE
JUDICIARY AND HOW IT PROCESSES.
IT'S BASICALLY A PERMISSION SLIP
FOR THE SENATE JUDICIARY
COMMITTEE TO ACTUALLY PROCESS
DISTRICT COURT NOMINATIONS AND
CIRCUIT COURT NOMINATIONS.
THEN THEY DELAY BEFORE THEY HAVE
A VOTE BEFORE THE FULL SENATE
AND THIS IS A PRESIDENT WHO'S
FACED THE LONGEST DELAYS FROM
SENATE JUDICIARY HEARINGS TO THE
FLOOR VOTE OF ANY PRESIDENT IN
HISTORY.
SO I THINK YES, OF COURSE THERE
ARE VACANCIES.
AND I WOULD SAY THE OTHER POINT
IS THAT IT WAS CERTAINLY --
THERE WAS A STRONG PUSH BY THE
REPUBLICAN, INCLUDING SENATOR
GRASSLEY AND THE OTHER MEMBERS
OF THE SENATE JUDICIARY
COMMITTEE IN THE LEADERSHIP TO
FILL ALL 11 SEATS ON THE D.C.
CIRCUIT WHEN PRESIDENT BUSH WAS
PRESIDENT AND THEY SUCCEEDED IN
DOING SO.
THE ONLY CHANGE NOW THAT WE HAVE
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND NOT
PRESIDENT BUSH.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU ABOUT
THIS.
BECAUSE WHEN YOU SAID?
YOUR FIRST ANSWER THAT THIS IS A
BLATANT POLITICAL MOVE, YOU
CALLED IT, ISN'T THAT IN A SENSE
THE WAY THE SYSTEM WORKS?
THE PRESIDENT GETS TO PUT OUT
HIS NOMINEES AND ONE WOULD
EXPECT THAT THEY MIGHT, I DON'T
KNOW, HAVE -- BE IN ALIGNMENT
WITH WHAT HE THINKS?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
A PRESIDENT CAN NOMINATE THE
PEOPLE HE EXPECTS TO LINE UP
WITH HIS IDEOLOGY.
BUT THESE ARE THE SAME JUDICIARY
COMMITTEE MEMBERS WHO WERE
SAYING AT THE TIME OF PETER KIZ
WILL'S NOMINATION FOR EXAMPLE,
IT'S AMUSING, THE PRESIDENT WAS
SAYING ONE OF THESE NOMINATIONS
HAS BEEN SINCE IT WAS VACATED BY
CHIEF JUSTICE RON ROBERTS.
HE WAS IN THE SENATE WHILE THAT
THAT NOMINEE WAS SITTING THERE
900 DAYSINGS, DIDN'T EVEN GET A
HEARING.
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT JUDICIAL
NOMINEES HAVING A LONG PERIOD
FROM HEARING TO CONFIRMATION,
THAT'S JUST KICKING ONE STEP?
WHAT YOU'VE CHARACTERIZED AS A
COMPLICATED PROCESS.
DAY FROM THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION CLARIFIES THAT THE
OBAMA NOMINEES FROM NOMINATION
TO CONFIRMATION HAVE 240 DAYS.
BUSH'S NOMINEES WERE 283.
SO IT'S FASTER IF YOU LOOK AT
THE WHOLE PROCESS.
>> Brown: BUT I'M ASKING YOU
ABOUT THE PRINCIPLE OF IT.
YOU'VE BEEN A CLERK YOURSELF IN
THE COURT AND THE SUPREME COURT.
SO THE PRINCIPLE OF APPOINTING--
WHETHER IT'S A DEMOCRAT OR
REPUBLICAN-- WHAT IS WRONG --
WHY IS THAT PACKING THE COURT?
>> WELL, THE D.C. CIRCUIT
ACTUALLY -- THOSE SPACES ARE NOT
-- AT A TIME WE'VE GOT A BUDGET
CRUNCH, THERE'S BEEN A MOVE TO
MOVE OTHER SEATS TO OTHER
COURTS.
IT'S BEEN DONE BEFORE AND IN
TERMS OF THE RESOURCES SPENT
LOOKING AT THOSE NOMINATIONS,
THAT SHOULD BE SPENT ON PLACES
WHERE THERE ARE SERIOUS JUDICIAL
EMERGENCIES NOT AT THE D.C.
CIRCUIT.
THIS IS NOT A PLACE -- THIS IS
SOMEWHERE WROO ACTUALLY THERE'S
MORE SEATS THAN ARE NEGLIGENCE.
WHY ARE WE SPENDING OUR
RESOURCES THERE RATHER THAN THE
COURTS WHERE YOU FREQUENTLY HAVE
DISTRICT JUDGES IN A HAVE TO SIT
IN BECAUSE THERE AREN'T ENOUGH
CIRCUIT JUDGES TO HEAR THE CASE?
>> Brown: WHAT ABOUT TO YOUR
SIDE THAT THE ARGUMENT THAT THE
DEMOCRATS OFTEN DID THE SAME TO
REPUBLICANS AND WE JUST HAD SRI
VINA VASEN.
>> RIGHT TO THE 11th SEAT D.C.
CIRCUIT.
IT'S CLEAR THERE'S POLITICS IN
THIS.
WE HAVE A PRESIDENT WHO GOT
ELECTED BUT I WOULD REMIND US
AGAIN COME MASS GRIFFITH WAS
CONFIRMED TO THE D.C. SIR DOUBT
THE 11th SEAT UNDER GEORGE BUSH
WHEN THE CASE LOW WAS LOWER THAN
IT IS NOW.
WE'VE CERTAINLY HAD ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS AT THE TIME.
I THINK THE ONLY REAL
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE HERE IS WHO'S
THE PRESIDENT.
AND IT'S HARD FOR KNOW
UNDERSTAND HOW COURT-PACKING NOW
IS FILLING THE EXISTING
VACANCIES WHEN PRESIDENT BUSH
WAS CAPABLE OF DOING THAT AND I
WOULD SAY THE FEDERALU
CONFERENCE CHAIRED BY CHIEF
JUSTICE ROBERTS JUST TWO MONTHS
AGO RECOMMENDED THAT ALL 11
SEATS OF THE D.C. CIRCUIT BE
FILLED.
>> Brown: JUST THINKING ABOUT
SRI SREENIVASAN, WOULD ANY OF
THESE CURRENT THREE NEW NOMINEES
GENERATE OPPOSITION OR
COROVENTRSY IF THEY WERE PUT
FORWARD INDIVIDUALLY RATHER THAN
ALL TOGETHER?
>> I THINK PUTTING THEM THROUGH
ALL TOGETHER IS CLEARLY A
PUBLICITY STUNT ON THE PART OF
THE PRESIDENT AND HAS BEEN --.
>> Brown: YOU THINK HE'S
THROWING IT AT THE REPUBLICANS.
>> I THINK IT WAS SENATOR SHUPL
WHO SAID LOOK, HOLDING UP
NOMINATIONS ONE AT A TIME WOULD
BE ONE THING BUT IN WILL FORCE
THEM TO LAY DOWN AND DI SIDE
WHAT THEY'RE GOING TO DO AT ONCE
SO IT'S CLEARLY A STRATEGIC
MOVE.
I THINK WHAT MAKES IT LIKE COURT
PACKING, WE'RE REFERENCING
PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT'S ATTEMPT TO
PACK THE SUPREME COURT TO GET
HIS AGENDA THROUGH IS IN FACT
EVEN THE PRESIDENT'S ALLIES HAVE
SAID IS THE REASON WE NEED THESE
PEOPLE ON THE D.C. CIRCUIT IS
NOT BECAUSE OF WORKLOAD BUT
BECAUSE -- THEY DIDN'T SAY NOT
BECAUSE OF WORKLOAD.
THEY SAID BECAUSE WE NEED TO
HAVE SOMEONE WHO IS GOING TO BE
APPROVING THE PRESIDENT'S AGENDA
AND HIS AGENDA IS MOVING
STRAIGHT THROUGH THE REGULATORY
SYSTEM AND WILL BE GOING THROUGH
THAT ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS.
SO THAT'S EXACTLY SAME THING
THAT PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT WAS
TRYING TO DO WHEN HE WAS PACKING
THE COURT.
IT'S A VERY SIMILAR PARALLEL.
>> Brown: VERY BRIEFLY, DO YOU
EXPECT WILL THIS WILL END IN A
CLASH IN THE SENATE?
>> NO DOUBT.
BUT I DO HAVE TO RESPOND TO HOW
COURT-PACKING CAN BE FILLING
EXISTING VACANCIES.
THAT IS JUST SO ORWELLIAN IT
JUST CAN'T EVEN --
>> THAT TERM, PAT LAHEY HAS USED
THAT TERM SO -- THAT TERM HAS
BEEN USED BY BOTH SIDES --
>> NOT TO FILL EXISTING
VACANCIES.
I THINK THERE WILL BE A CLASH.
THERE'S DEFINITELY MITCH
McCONNELL MADE IT CLEAR TODAY HE
IS GOING TO FIGHT AND I HOPE
LEADER REID DOES THE SAME.
>> Brown: CAROLINE FREDRICKSON,
CARRIE SEVERINO, THANK YOU BOTH
VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR, THE MILITARY'S TOP
BRASS RESPOND TO SEXUAL ASSAULTS
IN THE RANKS; PRESIDENT REAGAN'S
BUDGET CHIEF ARGUES AGAINST
GOVERNMENT BAILOUTS; AND THE
SCIENCE AND THE RISKS OF CHASING
STORMS.
BUT FIRST, WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THE DAY, HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: CONSERVATIVE GROUPS
SPOKE OUT TODAY ABOUT THE ABUSE
THEY SAY THEY ENDURED AT THE
HANDS OF THE I.R.S.
IT WAS THEIR FIRST APPEARANCE AT
A CONGRESSIONAL HEARING SINCE
THE CONTROVERSY BROKE.
>> GOOD MORNING.
HOLE HOLE REPUBLICANS IN CHARGE
OF THE TAX WRITING HOUSE WAYS
AND MEANS COMMITTEE CALLED SIX
ORGANIZATIONS SCRUTINIZED BY THE
I.R.S. WHEN THEY APPL FOR
TAX-EXEMPT STATUS.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE GROUPS
TOLD OF WAITING UP TO THREE
YEARS FOR THEIR APPLICATIONS TO
BE APPROVED AND HAVING TO ANSWER
QUESTIONS ABOUT THEIR POLITICAL
VIEWS.
BECKY GARRETTSON LEADS A TEA
PARTY GROUP IN ALABAMA.
>> GOVERNMENT AGENTS MADE
INVASIVE AND EXCESSIVE DEMANDS
FOR INFORMATION THEY WERE NOT
ENTITLED TO.
THE INDIVIDUALS WHO SOUGHT TO
INTIMIDATE US WERE ACTING AS
THEY THOUGHT THEY SHOULD: IN THE
A GOVERNMENT CULTURE THAT HAS
LITTLE RESPECT FOR ITS CITIZENS.
>> Brown: AND JOHN EASTMAN SAID
THE I.R.S. DISCLOSED
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION ABOUT
SUPPORTERS OF HIS ANTI-GAY
MARRIAGE GROUP THE NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR MARRIAGE.
>> THE EFFORT SEEMS TO HAVE BEEN
DESIGNED TO SUBJECT OUR DONORS
TO ABUSE, TO INTIMIDATION AND,
MORE SIGNIFICANTLY FOR OUR
PURPOSES, TO CHILL THEM FROM
DONATING SGON WE COULD KEEP UP
THE POLITICAL FIGHT THAT WE'RE
IN THE MIDDLE OF.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRATS JOINED IN
CRITICIZING THE I.R.S.' HANDLING
OF THE APPLICATION, BUT
WASHINGTON STATE'S JIM McDERMOTT
ARGUED THE GROUPS WERE HIGHLY
POLITICAL SOME SOME QUESTIONS
WERE JUSTIFIED.
>> NONE OF YOUR ORGANIZATIONS
WERE KEPT FROM ORGANIZING OR
SILENCED.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT WHETHER OR
NOT THE AMERICAN TAXPAYERS WILL
SUBSIDIZE YOUR WORK.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A TAX BREAK.
>> Reporter: THE I.R.S. ALSO
FACED NEW CRITICISM FOR
SPENDING.
A TREASURY DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR
GENERAL REPORTED SOME 200
EMPLOYEE CONFERENCES HELD BY THE
AGENCY BETENWE 2010 AND 2012
COST $50ILLI MON.
THAT INCLUDED ONE TRAINING VIDEO
SHOWING WORKERS DANCING AND
ANOTHER PARODYING THE 1960s T.V.
SHOW "STAR TREK."
>> Holman: NEW JERSEY GOVERNOR
CHRIS CHRISTIE MOVED TODAY TO
FILL A VACANT U.S. SENATE SEAT
WITH A SPECIAL ELECTION IN
OCTOBER.
THE SEAT WAS HELD BY VETERAN
DEMOCRAT FRANK LAUTENBERG.
HE DIED YESTERDAY AT THE AGE OF
89.
CHRISTIE COULD HAVE NAMED A
TEMPORARY REPLACEMENT TO SERVE
THROUGH 2014 AND FINISH OUT
LAUTENBERG'S TERM, BUT HE SAID
THAT WOULD NOT BE FAIR TO
VOTERS.
>> THERE ARE GOING TO BE A LOT
OF CONSEQUENTIAL THINGS THAT ARE
GOING TO BE DECIDED OR COULD BE
DECIDED IN THE UNITED STATES
SENATE IN THAT 18 MONTHS.
AND I JUST THOUGHT IT WAS TOO
LONG A PERIOD OF TIME FOR ANY
PERSON TO HAVE THE SOLE
AUTHORITY TO PICK WHO REPRESENTS
US IN THE UNITED STATES SENATE.
I BELIEVE THE PEOPLE HAVE THE
WRITE TO MAKE THAT DECISION.
THEY NEED TO HAVE A VOICE AND A
CHOICE.
>> Holman: CHRISTIE SAID HE WILL
APPOINT SOMEONE TO SERVE AS NEW
JERSEY SENATOR UNTIL THE OCTOBER
VOTE.
THE GOVERNOR HIMSELF IS UP FOR
REELECTION IN THIS YEAR'S
GENERAL ELECTION, SET FOR
NOVEMBER.
A COLORADO JUDGE TODAY ACCEPTED
A PLEA OF NOT GUILTY BY REASON
OF INSANITY IN LAST SUMMER'S
MASS SHOOTING AT A MOVIE
THEATER.
JAMES HOLMES APPEARED THIS
MORNING TO ENTER THE PLEA.
HE'S CHARGED WITH KILLING 12
PEOPLE AND INJURING 70 OTHERS.
HIS ACTION TODAY SETS THE STAGE
FOR A LONG MENTAL EVALUATION
BEFORE ANY TRIAL.
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER OF
TURKEY HAS ISSUED A PARTIAL
APOLOGY FOR A CRACKDOWN ON
ANTIGOVERNMENT PROTESTERS.
HE ACKNOWLEDGED TODAY THAT
POLICE INITIALLY USED EXCESSIVE
FORCE IN RAIDING A SIT-IN AT A
PARK.
BUT HE SAID THOUSANDS OF OTHERS
WHO BATTLED POLICE DO NOT
DESERVE AN APOLOGY.
DEMONSTRATORS WERE OUT IN FORCE
AGAIN TODAY IN ANKARA, BUT THIS
TIME, RIOT POLICE HANDED THEM
FLOWERS IN THE SAME COLORS AS
THE TURKISH FLAG.
THERE WERE NEW ASSERTIONS TODAY
OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS USE IN
SYRIA.
A UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION OF
INQUIRY REPORTED IT HAS
"REASONABLE GROUNDS" TO BELIEVE
AT LEAST FOUR SUCH ATTACKS HAVE
TAKEN PLACE.
THE COMMISSION COULD NOT
DETERMINE WHO USED THE WEAPONS.
BUT IT DID SAY BOTH GOVERNMENT
AND REBEL FORCES HAVE COMMITTED
WAR CRIMES.
COMMISSION CHAIR PAULO PINHEIRO
SPOKE IN GENEVA.
>> CRIMES THAT SHOCK THE
CONSCIENCE HAVE BECOME A DAILY
REALITY.
HUMANITY HAS BEEN THE CASUALTY
OF THIS WAR.
SYRIA NEEDS NOT A MILITARY
SURGE; SYRIA NEEDS A DIPLOMATIC
SURGE.
>> Holman: SEPARATELY, THE
FRENCH GOVERNMENT SAID IT HAS
CONFIRMED SARIN NERVE GAS HAS
BEEN USED "MULTIPLE TIMES" IN
SYRIA, AT LEAST ONCE BY ASSAD
REGIME FORCES.
IN EGYPT, A COURT SENTENCED 16
AMERICANS TO UP TO FIVE YEARS IN
PRISON FOR USING FOREIGN FUNDS
TO FOMENT UNREST.
ALL WORKED FOR NON-PROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS, AND ALL BUT ONE
ALREADY HAD LEFT THE COUNTRY.
THEY WERE SENTENCED IN ABSENTIA.
THE JUDGE ALSO ORDERED THAT THE
OFFICES OF SEVERAL OF THE NON-
PROFITS BE CLOSED.
THE DEATH TOLL FROM FLOODS IN
EUROPE ROSE TO AT LEAST TEN
TODAY, EVEN AS FLOODWATERS
RECEDED IN THE HARD-HIT CITY OF
PASSAU, GERMANY.
RAIN-SWOLLEN RIVERS ACROSS
SOUTHERN GERMANY, AUSTRIA,
SWITZERLAND, AND THE CZECH
REPUBLIC STILL WERE RISING IN
OTHER CITIES.
THOUSANDS OF GERMAN SOLDIERS
WERE CALLED IN TO HELP SAND-BAG
AND GET PEOPLE OUT OF THE FLOOD
ZONE.
WALL STREET GAVE GROUND TODAY
AMID QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW MUCH
LONGER THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S
STIMULUS EFFORTS WILL LAST.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 76 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,177.
THE NASDAQ FELL 20 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3445.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: THE MILITARY'S TOP
BRASS CROWDED INTO A SENATE
HEARING ROOM TODAY TO DEFEND
THEMSELVES AGAINST CHARGES THAT
THEY ARE DOING TOO LITTLE TO PUT
AN END TO SEXUAL ASSAULT IN THE
MILITARY.
AT ISSUE: WHO CAN BE TRUSTED TO
FIX THE PROBLEM.
>> TWO TWO WEEKS AGO I TOLD MY
COMMANDERS THAT COMBATING SEXUAL
ASSAULT AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT
WITHIN OUR RKS IANS OUR
NUMBER-ONE PRIORITY.
>> Ifill: ARMY GENERAL ODE ODE
ODE AND THE OTHER SERVICE CHIEF
PRESENTED A UNITED FRONT ON THE
DAMAGE DONE BY SEXUAL ASSAULT.
BUT THEY ALSO OPPOSED ANY MOVE
TO STRIP COMMANDERS OF AUTHORITY
OVER PROSECUTING THOSE CASES.
>> AS WE CONSIDER FURTHER
REFORMS, THE ROLE OF THE
COMMANDER SHOULD REMAIN CENTRAL.
>> WITHOUT EQUIVOCATION, I
BELIEVE MAINTAINING THE CENTRAL
ROLE OF COMMANDER IN OUR
MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM IS
ABSOLUTELY CRITICAL TO ANY
SOLUTION.
>> WE HAVE FOUND THAT SUCCESSFUL
EFFECTIVE, AND PERMANENT CHANGES
IN OUR MILITARY ARE BEST DONE
THROUGH OUR COMMANDERS, THE
CHAIN OF COMMAND.
>> COMMANDING OFFICERS NEVER
DELEGATE RESPONSIBILITY, THEY
SHOULD NEVER BE FORCED TO
DELEGATE THEIR AUTHORITY.
>> Ifill: THE BILL'S SPONSOR,
DEMOCRATIC SENATOR KIRSTENRAND Y
DISAGREED.
>> NOT ALL COMMANDERS ARE
OBJECTIVE.
NOT EVERY SINGLE COMMANDER
NECESSARILY WANTS WOMEN IN THE
FIRST.
NOT EVERY SINGLE COMMANDER
BELIEVES WHAT A SEXUAL ASSAULT
IS.
NOT EVERY SINGLE COMMANDER CAN
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN A SLAP ON
THE ASS AND A RAPE BECAUSE THEY
MERGE ALL OF THESE CRIMES
TOGETHER.
>> Ifill: MISSOURI DEMOCRAT
CLAIRE McCASKILL PURSUED THAT
THEME SAYING THE PROBLEM GOES
MUCH DEEPER THAN MILITARY
LEADERS COMPREHEND.
>> THIS ISN'T ABOUT SEX, THIS IS
ABOUT ASSAULTIVE DOMINATION AND
VIOLENCE AND AS LONG AS THOSE
TWO GET MUSHED TOGETHER YOU ALL
ARE NOT GOING TO BE AS
SUCCESSFUL AS YOU NEED TO BE AT
GETTING AFTER THE MOST INSIDIOUS
PART OF THIS, WHICH IS THE
PREDATORS IN YOUR RANKS THAT ARE
SULLYING THE GREAT NAME OF OUR
AMERICAN MILITARY.
>> Ifill: A RECENT PENTAGON
STUDY FOUND AS MANY AS
26,000 SEXUAL ASSAULTS WENT
UNREPORTED LAST YEAR, UP NEARLY
7,000 FROM 2010.
GILLIBRAND WARNED VICTIMS DO NOT
BELIEVE THE CHAIN OF COMMAND
WILL TREAT THEM FAIRLY.
>> MY CONCERN IS THAT YOU HAVE
LOST THE TRUST OF THE MEN AND
WOMEN WHO RELY ON YOU.
THAT YOU WILL ACTUALLY BRING
JUSTICE IN THESE CASES.
THEY'RE AFRAID TO REPORT.
THEY THINK THEIR CAREERS WILL BE
OVER.
THEY FEAR RETALIATION.
THEY FEAR BEING BLAMED.
>> Reporter: BUT THE CHIEFS
ARGUE THAT IF COMMANDERS DON'T
DECIDE ON SEXUAL ASSAULT CASES
IT COULD HURT UNIT COHESION.
INDIANA DEMOCRAT JOE DONNELLY
QUESTIONED ODIERNO ON THAT
CLAIM.
>> WHY WOULD A SOLDIER THINK
LESS OF THEIR COMMANDER SIMPLY
BECAUSE THEIR COMMANDER DOESN'T
HANDLE THIS AREA?
>> I WANT THE COMMANDER FULLY
INVOLVED IN THE DECISIONS THAT
HAVE AN IMPACT ON THE MORALE AND
COHESION OF THE UNIT TO INCLUDE
PUNISHMENT.
TO INCLUDE U.C.M.J..
THAT'S THEIR RESPONSIBILITY.
IT'S NOT TOO MUCH
RESPONSIBILITY.
IN MY MIND, IT SETS THE TONE.
>> Reporter: BUT REPUBLICAN JOHN
McCAIN OF ARIZONA SAID THE
PROBLEM MAY ALREADY BE DOING
MORE DAMAGE THAN THE MILITARY
REALIZES.
>> WE HAVE TO ASK OURSELVES IF
LEFT UNCORRECTED WHAT IMPACT
WILL THIS PROBLEM HAVE ON
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION OF
QUALIFIED MEN AND WOMEN?
JUST LAST NIGHT A WOMAN CAME TO
ME AND SAID HER DAUGHTER WANTED
TO JOIN IN THE MILITARY AND
COULD I GIVE MY UNQUALIFIED
SUPPORT FOR HER DOING SO.
I COULD NOT.
>> Ifill: THE CHAIRMAN OF THE
JOINT CHIEFS, GENERAL MARTIN
DEMPSEY ACKNOWLEDGED THE ISSUE
DESERVES MUCH MORE ATTENTION
THAN IT RECEIVED DURING A DECADE
OF WAR.
CO>>MING OUT OF THIS PERIOD OF
CONFLICT WE'VE GOT SOLDIERS,
SAILORS, AIRMEN, MARINES, COAST
GUARD WHO ENGAGE IN SOME
HIGH-RISK BEHAVIOR AS THEY COME
OUT OF THE CONFLICT.
SO WHEN YOU TIE IT ALL TOGETHER,
I WOULDN'T SAY THAT WE'VE BEEN I
ACTIVE BUT WE'VE BEEN LESS
ACTIVE THAN WE PROBABLY NEED TO
BE.
IS.
>> Ifill: DESPITE THEIR
OPPOSITION TO THE KEY PORTION OF
THE GILLIBRAND BILL, DEMOCRATS
IN CONGRESS AGREED TO WORK ON
THE PROGRESS.
EVERYONE AGREES ON THE BREADTH
OF THE PROBLEM, BUT THERE IS NO
SINGLE AGREED UPON SOLUTION.
HERE WITH TWO VIEWS ARE EUGENE
FIDELL, A SENIOR RESEARCH
SCHOLAR IN LAW AT YALE.
HE'S SPENT HIS CAREER PRACTICING
MILITARY LAW, AND IS A MEMBER OF
THE DEFENSE DEPARTMENT'S LEGAL
POLICY BOARD.
AND RETIRED MAJOR GENERAL
CHARLES DUNLAP, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER ON LAW,
ETHICS AND NATIONAL SECURITY AT
DUKE UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH, GENTLEMEN,
GENE FIDELL, STARTING WITH YOU.
WHAT'S THE CORRECT SOLUTION?
>> I THINK CREDIBILITY SOLUTION,
GWEN, IS THAT IT'S TIME TO BRING
THE MILITARY JUSTICE IN GIN--
NOT SIMILARBLY RESPECT TO SEXUAL
OFFENSES, BUT IN GENERAL-- INTO
THE 21st CENTURY.
THERE WAS A VERY IMPRESSIVE
ARRAY OF OFFICIALS AT THE
HEARING TODAY BEFORE THE SENATE
ARMS SERVICES COMMITTEE, MANY OF
THEM IN UNIFORM.
BUT IF YOU'LL FORGIVE ME, I WANT
TO PUT UP A PICTURE OF THE
PERSON WHO WAS THE GHOST AT THE
BANQUET.
IT'S THIS INDIVIDUAL AND PERHAPS
YOU RECOGNIZE OUR LAST MONARCH
GEORGE III.
BECAUSE IN KEY RESPECTS, WE'RE
STILL DEALING WITH A SYSTEM THAT
WAS IN EXISTENCE WHEN GEORGE III
SAT ON THE THRONE OF GREAT
BRITAIN.
WE'VE GOT TO GET PAST THE 18th
CENTURY AND GET INTO THE 21st
CENTURY WHEN IT COMES TO WHO
DECIDES WHICH CHARGES ARE
BROUGHT AGAINST WHOM AT WHICH
LEVEL OF COURT-MARTIAL.
>> Ifill: GENERAL DUNLAP, WHAT'S
YOUR OPINION?
>> I DISAGREE WITH MY FRIEND
GENE.
I THINK WE HAVE THOUSANDS OF
MILITARY HISTORY TO SHOW THAT A
COMMANDER-CENTRIC MILITARY
SYSTEM IS WHAT WORKS.
AND WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THE
UNITED STATES HAS THE MOST
POWERFUL MILITARY IN THE WORLD
AND THAT'S BUILT ON THE SYSTEM
THAT WE HAVE I'M NOT SAYING THAT
SOME CHANGES WOULD BE MADE IN
THE MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM BUT
WE SHOULD NOT BE GIVING TO
ANYONE OTHER THAN A COMMANDER
WHO HAS THE RESPONSIBILITY, THAT
COMPLEX RESPONSIBILITY OF
PREPARING HUMAN BEINGS TO KILL
OTHER HUMAN BEINGS, SOMETHING
FOR WHICH THERE'S NO COUNTERPART
IN THE CIVILIAN WORLD, TAKING
AWAY THAT RESPONSIBILITY FOR
DISCIPLINE.
LET ME TELL YOU SOMETHING: IN
THE MILITARY IF THE COMMANDER
ISN'T THE CENTERPIECE OF
SOMETHING YOU ARE TAKING AWAY
THE POTENTIAL EFFECTIVENESS OF
THE PROGRAM.
IT HAS TO BE -- IT CAN'T BE
GIVEN TO SOME STAFF OFFICER.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU BOTH TO
WEIGH ON THIS BECAUSE BOTH OF
YOU ARE TALKING ABOUT THE ENTIRE
MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM AND THE
IMPORTANCE OR LACK OF IMPORTANCE
FOR THE COMMANDER BEING CENTRAL
TO IT.
BUT IN THESE PARTICULAR CASES,
THESE SPECIFIC CASES WHICH WERE
CITED AT THIS HEARING ABOUT
SEXUAL ASSAULT IN WHICH PEOPLE
AS WE HEARD SENATOR GILLIBRAND
SAYING, VICTIMS DON'T TRUST THEE
CHAIN OF COMMAND TO PURSUE WHAT
THEY NEED PURSUED.
IS THAT DIFFERENT FROM WHAT
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT?
WHAT HAPPENS TO THE ENTIRE
MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM?
STARTING WITH YOU GENED ANY DEL.
>> NO SYSTEM IS EVERY GOING TO
BE PERFECT.
THAT'S SOMETHING WE HAVE TO GET
ON THE TABLE.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE CIVILIAN
SYSTEM AS A MODEL IT, TOO, HAS
BLEMISHS.
IT'S CLEAR IN THIS ERA THE
DECISION MAKING AS TO WHO GETS
SENT TO JAIL OR WHO GETS SENT
INTO A CRIMINAL TRIAL IS A
DECISION THAT IS HEAVILY LEGAL
IN CONTENT AND MADE BY
PROSECUTORS.
THAT'S IN STARK CONTRAST WHERE
COMMANDERS WHO MAY HAVE A LITTLE
MORE THAN A COUPLE WEEKS
TRAINING AS THEY ASCEND THE LAD
INTERTHE MAJOR COMMAND BILLETS
HAVE TO LEARN.
THAT IS THE WORK OF LAWYERS.
IT'S THE WORK OF DISTRICT
ATTORNEY'S.
IT'S THE WORK OF THE UNITED
STATES ATTORNEYS AND IN THE
MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM THE
PERSON WITH HIS OR HER FINGER ON
THE TRIGGER IN TERMS OF
PROSECUTION OUGHT TO BE A
LAWYER.
NOT SIMPLY AN ADVICE GIVER BUT A
DECIDER.
>> Ifill: GENERAL DUNLAP, IS
SENATOR McCASKELL AND McCAIN
RIGHT WHEN THEY SAY THAT WOMEN
SHOULD NOT FEEL SECURE ANYMORE
ABOUT BEING IN THE MILITARY
BECAUSE OF THE WAY THAT THESE
CHARGES ARE PURSUED?
>> LOOK, SEXUAL ASSAULT IS A
TERRIBLE CRIME.
IT'S A TERRIBLE CRIME IN THE
CIVILIAN SOCIETY AND IF YOU LOOK
AT THE STATISTICS FROM CIVILIAN
SOCIETY I THINK THAT -- I WOULD
HOPE THAT YOUNG WOMEN ESPECIALLY
WOULD CONTINUE TO CONSIDER THE
MILITARYMENT BUT THE FACT OF THE
MATTER IS THAT THE MILITARY-- AS
THE SUPREME COURT HAS SAID
MULTIPLE TIMES-- IS A DIFFERENT
KIND OF SOCIETY THAN CIVILIAN
SOCIETY SO TRYING TO BUILD A
CIVILIAN SYSTEM INTO THE
MILITARY FOR THIS PARTICULAR
KIND OF CRIME IS A MISTAKE.
IT NEEDS -- COMMANDERS NEED TO
BE THE CENTRAL ISSUE AND THE
IDEA OF NON-LEGALLY TRAINING
PEOPLE MAKING THESE DECISIONS
SEEMS TO BE OVERLOOKING THE FACT
THAT GOVERNORS AND THE PRESIDENT
ISSUE PARDONS ALL THE TIME AND
THEY'RE NOT EVEN REQUIRED TO GET
LEGAL ADVICE AS A MILITARY
COMMANDER IS.
MILITARY COMMANDERS MAKE
EXTREMELY COMPLEX DECISIONS
BASED ON VERY CONFLICTING
MATTERS OF FACT ALL THE TIME AND
HOW THEY'RE SOMEHOW INCOMPETENT
TO APPLY RULES AND SO FORTH AND
MAKE FACTUAL JUDGMENTS IN THIS
AREA IS BEYOND COMP
COMPREHENSION.
>> Ifill: WHAT IF THE PERSON WHO
IS DECIDING HOW YOUR CASE WILL
BE PROSECUTED IS ALSO SOMEONE IN
CHARGE OF YOU?
WHAT DO YOU DO, GENE FIDELL, OR
WHAT CAN A MEMBER OF THE ARMED
FORCES DO WHO FEARS RETALIATION?
IS THAT A REAL CONCERN?
>> IT IS A CONCERN
RETALIATION CAN HAVE A CORROSIVE
EFFECT ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF
JUSTICE AS WELL AS UNIT COHESION
BY THE WAY.
UNIT COHESION IS A CATCH PHRASE
DROPPED IN INTO THE CONVERSATION
MUCH THE WAY IT WAS IN THE NOW
ABANDONED "DON'T ASK, DON'T
TELL" POLICY.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT A COMMANDER
MAY BE PUT IN A TOTALLY
IMPOSSIBLE SITUATION.
HERE'S WHY.
COMMANDERS ARE GOING TO BE
GRADED IN TERMS OF THEIR OWN
EVALUATIONS BY THEIR SUPERIORS
ON COMMAND CLIMATE.
ONE ELEMENT OF WHICH IS HOW DID
GENDERS INTERACT AND ARE WOMEN
AT A DISADVANTAGE, FOR EXAMPLE.
THEY HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT THE
WELFARE OF THOSE PERSONNEL WHO
HAVE BEEN VICTIMIZED IN ONE WAY
OR ANOTHER AND THEY HAVE TO
WORRY ABOUT THE WELFARE AND
RIGHTS OF PEOPLE ARE THEIR
SUBORDINATES WHO MAY GET CHARGED
WITH OFFENSES.
HOW DO YOU JUGGLE THOSE THINGS.
>> Ifill: HOW DO YOU JUGGLE
THOSE THINGS?
>> WELL, COMMANDERS JUGGLE
MULTIPLE THINGS ALL THE TIME.
THEY'RE MAKING LIFE-AND-DEATH
DECISIONS ON BATTLEFIELDS.
I AGREE THERE ARE ROGUE
COMMANDERS OUT THERE BUT WE
ALREADY HAVE AT LEAST THREE
STATUTORY MEANS FOR THE KIND OF
PERSON WHO FEELS THEY'VE BEEN
WRONGED BY THEIR COMMANDER.
ARTICLE 138 ALREADY IN THE
U.C.M.J..
>> Ifill: THE MILITARY CODE OF
-- THE UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY
JUSTICE.
JUST WANT TO POINT THAT OUT.
>> THANK YOU.
ALSO CONGRESS IT HAD LAW IN 2006
AND MAKES IT -- IT'S ALWAYS BEEN
NORTHBOUND THE U.C.M.J. THAT
JUDGE ADVOCATES CAN GO AROUND
THE CHAIN OF COMMAND AND RAISE
THINGS IN THE SENIOR LEVEL OF
THE JAG CHAIN AND IN ADDITION
THERE'S INSPECTOR GENERAL WHICH
IS IS ANOTHER STATUTORILY
PROTECTED OPTION.
SO THERE IS AT LEAST THREE
OPTIONS WHERE PEOPLE CAN GO
AROUND THE CHAIN OF COMMAND
ALREADY IN THE LAW.
>> Ifill: WELL, WE'LL HEAV TO
LEAVE IT THERE.
>> WE SHOULD KEEP IN MIND THAT
THE SYSTEM IN PLACE NOW IN 2006
THERE WERE 34,000 ESTIMATED
SEXUAL ASSAULTS.
THEY DROPPED TO 19,000.
A 44% DROP IN 2010 AND NOW WE'VE
SEEN AN UPTICK.
>> Ifill: WE'RE GOING HAVE TO
LEAVE THAT CONVERSATION FOR
ANOTHER TIME.
EUGENE FIDELL AT YALE LAW SCHOOL
AND GENERAL CHARLES DUNLAP AT
DUKE LAW SCHOOL.
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS, GWEN.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Brown: NEXT, ANOTHER ECONOMIC
MELTDOWN.
THAT'S THE DIRE PREDICTION OF A
FORMER WHITE HOUSE BUDGET
DIRECTOR, WHO ARGUES IN A RECENT
BOOK THAT WALL STREET AND
WASHINGTON ARE BROKEN.
NEWSHOUR ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN HAS THE FIRST OF TWO
TAKES ON THE GOVERNMENT'S ROLE
IN THE ECONOMIC RECORY,VE PART
OF HIS REGULAR REPORTING ON
MAKING SENSE OF FINANCIAL NEWS.
>> Solman: LIBERTARIAN DAVID
STOCKMAN HAS BEEN A
CONTROVERSIAL FIGURE SINCE HE
QUIT THE REAGAN ADMINISTRATION
AS BUDGET CHIEF IN 1985, BLAMING
IT FOR ILINFAG TO TAKE DEFICITS
SERIOUSLY.
HE BECAME RICH-- AND LEGALLY
EMBROILED-- AS A LEVERAGED
BUYOUT FINANCIER.
HE FACED ACCOUNTING FRAUD
CHARGES THAT WERE LATER DROPPED.
NOW HE'S BECOME VISIBLE AGAIN AS
AUTHOR OF "THE GREAT
DEFORMATION," A HEFTY SCREED
THAT ATTACKS THE LEFT AND RIGHT
ALIKE.
BUT MAINLY, IT ATTACKS
GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC
INTERVENTION.
IT BEGINS WITH THE CRASH OF '08.
STOCKMAN THINKS IT WAS LONG
OVERDUE.
>> THAT WAS MR. MARKET BRINGING
DISCIPLINE, BRINGING RESOLUTION
TO VERY RECKLESS FINANCIAL
BEHAVIOR.
WE SHOULD HAVE LET IT CONTINUE.
GOLDMAN WOULD HAVE WENT DOWN,
MORGAN STANLEY WOULD HAVE WENT
DOWN.
IT WOULD HAVE BURNED OUT THERE.
IT WOULDN'T HAVE SPREAD TO MAIN
STREET.
THE MAIN STREET BANKS WERE IN
GOOD SHAPE.
WE BASICALLY MADE A MOCKERY OUT
OF FREE MARKETS AND FINANCIAL
DISCIPLINE, AND WE'LL NEVER COME
BACK.: BUT THE THEORY OF THE
TIME WAS THAT BECAUSE LARGE
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS WERE SO
INTERCONNECTED WITH ONE ANOTHER,
THAT IF ONE WENT DOWN, LIKE
GOLDMAN, AND OWED LOTS OF MONEY
TO LOTS OF OTHERS, THOSE OTHERS
WOULD GO DOWN, AND DOMINOS.
>> RIGHT.
THAT WAS THE COMMON THEORY, THE
CONTAGION EFFECT.
THERE IS NO ECONOMIC BASIS IN
HISTORY FOR THE IDEA OF
CONTAGION.
>> Solman: ECONOMIC HISTORIANS
POINT TO THE ONSET OF THE
WORLDWIDE GREAT DEPRESSION OF
THE930' 1s AS EVIDENCE OF
CONTAGION, BUT STOCKMAN THINKS
THEY'RE FLAT-OUT WRONG ABOUT
THAT, AND WRONG ABOUT THE
DANGER, FIVE YEARS AGO, OF
CONTAGION LEADING TO A FINANCIAL
COLLAPSE.
MOREOVER, GOVERNMENT, AS THE
LEND OF ERLAST RESORT, HE SAYS,
JUST MAKES MATTERS WORSE.
>> WE SHOULDN'T HAVE BAILED OUT
THE BANKS OR A.I.G.
>> Solman: AND YOU THINK WE
SHOULDN'T HAVE BAILED OUT THE
AUTO INDUSTRY EITHER?
>> NO, ABSOLUTELY NOT.
WHEN WE BAILED OUT G.M., THE
ONLY THING WE DID WAS MOVE
4000 J,0OBS FROM BELOW THE MASON
DIXON LINE, WHERE THEY WOULD
HAVE BEEN PRODUCED IN HYUNDAI
PLANTS, OR HONDA PLANTS, OR
TOYOTA PLANTS, OR B.M.W. PLANTS,
TO NORTH OF THE MASON DIXON
LINE.
IT WAS ALL ABOUT THE ELECTORAL
COLLEGE; IT WAS NOT ABOUT JOBS.
>> Solman: BUT IT WOULD HAVE
BEEN TRAUMATIC TO DETROIT AND
EVERYBODY WHO HAD AN AUTO JOB.
>> WELL, OF COURSE.
BUT IF WE'RE GOING TO SAY THAT
WASHINGTON WILL RESCUE ANYBODY
WHO IS BIG AND NOISY AND
THREATENS A TRAUMA, THEN WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE TOTAL SOCIALISM,
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE AN OSSIFIED
ECONOMY, AND WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
CRONY CAPITALISM LIKE YOU HAVE
NEVER SEEN.
MONEY WILL DOMINATE EVERYTHING,
AND WE CROSSED THAT RUBICON WHEN
WE BAILED OUT DETROIT IN 2008.
>> Solman: WHAT DO YOU MEAN
EXACTLY BY "CRONY CAPITALISM,"
PARTICULARLY IF YOU'RE INCLUDING
THE UNITED AUTO WORKERS AMONG
THE CRONIES?
>> CRONY CAPITALISM TRIES TO GET
A DIFFERENT OUTCOME THAN WOULD
OCCUR ON THE MARKET BY USING THE
TOOLS AND MACHINERY OF
GOVERNMENT.
AS LONG AS YOU WANT THE
GOVERNMENT INTERVENING AT WILL
ANY TIME THERE'S AN EMERGENCY, A
CRISIS, A THREAT OF SOMETHING
GOING WRONG, THEN MONEY WILL
WIN, BECAUSE THEY WILL HIRE THE
BBYLOISTS, THEY WILL HIRE THE
LAWYERS, THE ACCOUNTANTS, AND
ALL THE REST OF THEM, AND YOU
WILL GET STUPID THINGS LIKE
WASHINGTON BAILING OUT GOLDMAN
SACHS, AND HAVING GOLDMAN COME
BACK WITHIN ONE YEAR WITH $28
BILLION OF SURPLUS.
>> Solman: SO, YOU THINK OUR
ECONOMY, PERHAPS OUR SOCIETY AS
A WHOLE, IS ON THE ONE HAND
WUSSIFIED-- WE CAN'T TAKE ANY
PAIN-- AND ON THE OTHER HAND
CONTROLLED BY A GROUP OF PEOPLE
IN WHOSE INTERESTS IT IS TO
PRESERVE THINGS AS THEY ARE?
>> SURE.
IT'S TWO SIDES OF THE SAME COIN.
THE PURPOSE OF WASHINGTON IS TO
PROP UP THE POWERFUL.
IF YOU'RE RUNNING A SMALL
BUSINESS IN INDIANA, THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO BAIL YOU OUT.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE SIZE, YOU HAVE
TO HAVE CLOUT.
WE HAVE A VERY UNFAIR SYSTEM
TODAY WHERE THE BUS DRIVERS ARE
PAYING TAXES SO THAT WE CAN GIVE
SOCIAL SECURITY TO OLD PEOPLE
THAT ARE RICH, AND WE CAN BAIL
OUT COMPANIES LIKE G.E. CAPITAL
AND GOLDMAN SACHS AND A.I.G. AND
ALL THE REST OF THEM THAT NEVER
SHOULD HAVE BEEN NEAR THE
TAXPERS'AY DOLLAR.
SO WE WOULD HAVE HAD A SERIOUS
RECESSION, BUT NO GREAT
DEPRESSION, NO BLACK HOLE.
>> Solman: BUT IF YOU WERE IN
GOVERNMENT THEN, YOU WOULD HAVE
BEEN WILLING TO ROLL THE DICE ON
IT?
>> ABSOLUTELY, BECAUSE WE'RE IN
SERIAL BUBBLES.
>> Solman: STOCKMAN BLAMES THE
FEDERAL RESERVE-- UNDER ALAN
GREENSPAN AND BEN BERNANKE-- FOR
INFLATING BUBBLES FOR YEARS BY
KEEPING INTEREST RATES LOW.
SINCE THE HOUSING BUBBLE BURST,
THE FED HAS BEEN FUELING THE
ECONOMY BY CREATING MONEY TO BUY
U.S. BONDS AND MORTGAGE-BACKED
SECURITIES.
BUT IN DOING SO, SAYS STOCKMAN,
THE FED IS JUST INFLATING YET
ANOTHER BUBBLE.
>> THE PROBLEM IS, YOU'RE
CREATING A SYSTEM OF BUBBLE
FINANCE, WHERE INTEREST RATES
ARE SO LOW THAT PEOPLE CAN
SPECULATE.
SO WHAT THIS IS, IS A GAMBLER'S
DREAM.
>> Solman: SO YOU THINK WE'RE
CRUISING FOR A BRUISING?
>> I THINK WE'RE DOING WHAT
EINSTEIN ONCE SAID IS THE
DEFINITION OF INSANITY.
HE SAID, "IF YOU DO THE SAME
THING OVER AND OVER AND EXPECT A
DIFFERENT RESULT, THAT'S A SIGN
OF INSANITY."
WE'RE DOING THE SAME THING OVER
AND OVER.
>> Solman: AS STOCKMAN TELLS IT,
LOW INTEREST RATES HAVE CREATED
FINANCIAL MARKETS FULL OF
SPECULATORS ADDICTED TO CHEAP
DEBT.
AS A LEVERAGED BUYOUT DEALMAKER,
HE WAS ONE OF THEM, AND BECAME
RICH IN THE PROCESS.
WHEN YOU WERE IN THE MIDST OF
ALL OF THIS, ING DOLEVERAGED
BUYOUTS, YOU WERE PART OF THE
BULE.BB
DID YOU THINK YOU MIGHT BE DOING
SOMETHING WRONG?
>> I'M NOT SAYING THERE'S EVIL
PEOPLE RUNNING AROUND WALL
STREET.
I'M NOT PARTICULARLY SAYING
MYSELF WAS EVIL, OKAY?
I'M SAYING IF ALL OF THE SYSTEM
IS GEARED TOWARDS MASSIVE
BORROWING AND SPECULATION ON
LEVERAGE, EVERYONE IS GOING TO
DO IT.
NOW, I HAD A COMPANY THAT WENT
BANKRUPT, AND AS A RESULT OF
THAT BANKRUPTCY, I HAD HUGE
PROBLEMS FOR YEARS.
>> Solman: WELL, YOU WERE
PROSECUTED.
>> YEAH.
BUT THEN THEY DROPPED THE CASE,
OKAY?
>> Solman: THEY ACCUSED YOU OF
ACCOUNTING FRAUD?
>> YEAH.
BUT IT TURNS OUT THAT THERE
WASN'T ANY ACCOUNTING FRAUD.
IT WAS A COMPANY THAT WAS WAY
OVER-LEVERAGED IN THE AUTO
BUSINESS, AN AUTO SUPPLIER.
I HAD FIVE OR SIX TIMES DEBT-TO-
CASH FLOW ON THE COMPANY.
IT WAS CRAZY-- NEVER SHOULD HAVE
BEEN DONE.
THAT WAS RECKLESS.
BUT IT WAS A PRETTY GOOD WAKEUP
CALL TO ME THAT IT WAS
WIDESPREAD THROUGHOUT OUR
ECONOMY.
WHY DID I HAVE SO MUCH DEBT ON
THE COMPANY THAT I HAD TO GO
BANKRUPT?
BECAUSE I COULD COME TO WALL
STREET AND RAISE IT IN A HALF A
DAY.
>> Solman: THE LAST QUESTION.
PAUL KRUGMAN CALLED YOU A CRANKY
OLD MAN.
AND THE ESSENCE WAS THAT YOU ARE
PUTTING ALL OF YOUR FAITH IN A
FREE MARKET THAT SURELY HAS ITS
OWN EXCESSES, ITS OWN
DEGRADATIONS, ITS OWN HORROR
SHOWS.
>> I STRUCK A RAW NERVE BECAUSE
I SAID YOU GUYS ARE PEDALING
NOTHING MORE THAN DEBT, AND
DEBT, AND MORE DEBT, AND MORE
MONEY PRINTING.
AND IT'S NOT SOUND ECONOMICS,
AND IT'S GOING TO FAIL.
AND THEY DIDN'T LIKE THAT.
>> Solman: DAVID STOCKMAN, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: WE'LL HEAR A VERY
DIFFERENT TAKE ON THIS IN THE
COMING DAYS, FROM NOBEL PRIZE-
WINNING ECONOMIST AND NEW YORK
TIMES COLUMNIST PAUL KRUGMAN.
ONLINE NOW, YOU CAN GET A SNEAK
PEAK AT KRUGMAN'S RESPONSE.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE BACK SHORTLY
WITH, BUT FIRST, THIS IS PLEDGE
WEEK ON PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT, AND THAT SUPPORT
HELPS KEEP PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON
THE AIR.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT,
CHASING STORMS, SCIENCE, AND
RISK.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
SAID FRIDAY'S DEADLY TORNADO
NEAR OKLAHOMA CITY WAS STRONGER
THAN INITIALLY REPORTED.
METEOROLOGISTS NOW CLASSIFY IT
AS AN EF-5, THE STRONGEST
RANKING POSSIBLE, WITH WINDS OF
295 MILES PER HOUR.
IT WAS ALSO THE WIDEST TWISTER
EVER RECORDED: 2.6 MILES.
THE STORM AND SUBSEQUENT
FLOODING KILLED 18 PEOPLE.
RAY SUAREZ HAS MORE.
RAY
>> TORNADO ON THE GROUND!
>> Suarez: A STORM CHASER
SOUNDED THE ALERT FRIDAY EVENING
AS THE ENORMOUS BLACK FUNNEL
FILLED THE DARK SKY JUST WEST OF
OKLAHOMA CITY.
THREE OF THOSE KILLED WERE STORM
CHASERS THEMSELVES.
TIM SAMARAS, 54; HIS SON PAUL,
24; AND CARL YOUNG, WHO WAS 45.
THEY WERE WORKING FOR DISCOVERY
CHANNEL.
THIS WAS ALL THAT REMAINED OF
THEIR TRUCK AFTER IT WAS CAUGHT
IN THE OPEN.
A COLLEAGUE SAYS ESCAPE WAS ALL
BUT IMPOSSIBLE.
>> IT WAS REALLY WILD TORNADO.
IT WAS RAPIDLY EVOLVING.
MULTIPLE TORNADOS TURNED INTO
ONE LARGER TORNADO AND THE
LARGER TORNADO WENT ONE WAY AND
SWITCHED DIRECTIONS OR QUICKLY
WENT ANOTHER WAY.
IT WAS A REALLY HARD STORM TO
TRACK.
>> Suarez: INDEED, THIS WEATHER
CHANNEL VEHICLE WAS PICKED UP BY
THE SAME STORM AND HURLED 200
YARDS.
ONLY ONE OF ITS CHASE TEAM OF
THREE WAS SERIOUSLY HURT.
IT WAS ALL TESTIMONYO T HOW
INHERENTLY DANGEROUS THIS
PROFESSION IS.
BUT ANOTHER COLLEAGUE SAYS TIM
SAMARAS WAS KNOWN FOR HIS
CAUTION.
>> HE KNEW WHAT HE WAS DOING.
HE DIDN'T CHASE FOR NOTORIETY OR
TELEVISION OR SELLING VIDEO.
HE CHASED BECAUSE HE GENUINELY
WANTED TO LEARN MORE ABOUT
SEVERE WEATHER.
>> Suarez: THE STORM PREDICTION
CENTER IN NORMAN, OKLAHOMA, SAID
THE MEN KILLED FRIDAY APPEAR TO
BE THE FIRST SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCHERS TO DIE IN PURSUIT OF
TORNADOS.
FOR MORE WE TURN TO A PROFESSOR
OF RESEARCH IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
OKLAHOMA, HE'S DONE RESEARCH IN
THE FIELD.
PROFESSOR, LET ME BEGIN BY
ASKING WHAT A STORM CHASER IS
ACTUALLY DOING.
WHY DO THESE PEOPLE RIDE TOWARD
THOSE OMINOUS LOOKING FUNNELS
WHEN EVERYBODY ELSE IS TRYING TO
GET AWAY FROM THEM.
>> THOSE OF US LOOKING FROM A
SCIENTIFIC VOOUPT WANT TO GET ME
MEASUREMENTS.
SOME OF US USE MOBILE DOPPLER
RADARS.
FOR THESE WE DON'T NEED TO GET
TOO CLOSE TO THE TORNADO,
USUALLY TWO, THREE, FOUR, FIVE
MILES.
BUT THE PEOPLE WHO WANT TO GET
VERY NEAR TORNADOS TO MAKE
MEASUREMENTS OF TEMPERATURE AND
PRESSURE HAVE TO GET CLOSER AND
LEAVE THEIR INSTRUMENTS IN THE
PATHS OF THE TORNADOS AND HOPE
THE TORNADOS COME OVER THOSE
INSTRUMENTS.
TORNADOS ARE SO SMALL RELATIVELY
SPEAKING THAT WE NEED TOO GET
VERY CLOSE.
>> Suarez: AND THERE'S NO OTHER
AY INTELLIGENCE
BESIDES PUTTING YOURSELF AT
CONSIDERABLE PERSONAL RISK?
>> WELL, OF COURSE, WITH THE
RADAR WE TRY TO STAY RELATIVELY
SAFE DISTANCE FROM THE TORNADO.
BUT WE NEED THE OBSERVATIONS,
ESPECIALLY TO VERIFY THEORIES
AND TO VERIFY COMPUTER
SIMULATIONS.
>> Suarez: FOR SOME OF THESE
PEOPLE, PROFESSOR, IS THERE ALSO
AN ELEMENT OF THRILL SEEKING?
AN APPETITE FOR RISK THAT GOES
ALONG WITH SEEKING OUT THESE
STORMS AND HEADING INTO THE FACE
OF THEM?
>> I THINK FOR SOME OF THE
AMATEUR STORM CHASERS, NOT THE
SCIENTIFIC STORM CHASERS,
THERE'S THE THRILL OF THE CHASE.
PEOPLE ARE OUT TO GET AS CLOSE
AS THEY CAN, TO GET THE MOST
SPECTACULAR VIDEO AND THE MOST
SPECTACULAR PHOTOGRAPHS.
AND THAT'S REALLY DANGEROUS.
>> Suarez: HOW DO YOU DO THE
BENEFIT/RISK CALCULATION?
WHEN YOU NOTE THERE ARE
IMPORTANT THINGS THAT NEED TO BE
LEARNED ABOUT THESE STORMS,
ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON INSIDE
THEM.
HOW DO YOU BALANCE THAT AGAINST
THE VERY POSSIBLE RISK OF INJURY
AND SOMETIMES DEATH?
>> WELL, WE KNOW THAT THERE ARE
PROBLEMS IN CHASING TORNADOS BUT
MOST OF US ARE -- PLAY IT VERY
SAFE.
WE TRY TO KEEP A SAFE DISTANCE
FROM THE STORM BUT IF WE CAN USE
OUR REMOTE INSTRUMENTATION TO
MAKE MEASUREMENTS SO SOMEDAY
WE'LL UNDERSTAND EXACTLY WHAT
THE STRUCTURE OF TORNADOS IS AND
TO BE ABLE TO FORECAST WHICH
STORMS WILL PRODUCE TORNADOS AND
WHICH WON'T, WE'LL BE ABLE TO
SAVE LIVES.
SO IN THE LONG RUN THERE'S A
TREMENDOUS BENEFIT.
>> Suarez: IT'S BEEN REVEALED
THAT THE TWISTER THAT HIT EL
RENO WAS THE WIDEST EVER
MEASURED AT 2.6 MILES WIDE.
A TREMENDOUS STORM.
IT TOOK 18 LIVES AND SOME OF THE
DEAD AREN'T EVEN IDENTIFIED HOW
DO YOU SAFELY APPROACH A TORNADO
LIKE THAT?
ARE THERE BEST PRACTICES?
ARE THERE A SET OF GUIDELINES
FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE IN THIS GAME
ABOUT WHAT TO DO AND WHAT NOT TO
DO?
>> I DON'T THINK THERE'S A
FORMAL SET OF GUIDELINES.
WE OPERATED VERY SAFELY OUT
THERE ON FRIDAY AND WE GOT EAST
OF THE STORM PROBABLY FIVE TO
TEN MILES AND TURNED OUR RADAR
ON AND LET THE STORM COME TO US.
AS SOON AS THE STORM GOT WITHIN
TWO OR THREE MILES WE RETREATED
AND MOVED DOWN THE ROAD ANOTHER
FIVE OR TEN MILES.
FOR THE PEOPLE WHO GO AND TAKE
PICTURES AND VIDEOS, I WOULDN'T
RECOMMEND GETTING WITHIN TWO OR
THREE MILES FROM THE TORNADO.
THAT COULD BE DANGEROUS AND ALSO
DEBRIS FROM THE TORNADO CAN FALL
WELL OUTSIDE THE TORNADO.
>> Suarez: THOSE PEOPLE INTEREST
ME.
WITH THE PROLIFERATION OF CABLE
SHOWS AND THE OPEN SOLICITATION
BY LOCAL NEWS CHANNELS OF "SHOW
US YOUR OWN VIDEO OF THE STORM"
AMATEURS ARE ENCOURAGED, PEOPLE
WHO AREN'T TAKING ANY SCIENTIFIC
MEASUREMENTS AT ALL, FRANKLY,
THEY'RE ENCOURAGED TO GET OUT
THERE AND TAKE THE MOST
JAW-DROPPING PICTURES.
WOULD YOU ASK THEM WOULD YOU
WANT THEM TO STAY AT HOME?
STAY SOMEPLACE SAFE INSAID?
>> I'D PREFER MOST OF THEM STAY
AWAY.
THERE IS SOME BENEFIT TO HAVING
AMATEURS OUT THERE TAKING
PICTURES.
THEY SEND THEM THE NATIONAL
WEATHER SERVICE AND THE NATIONAL
WEATHER SERVICE IS MADE AWARE
THAT THERE IS A TORNADO OUT
THERE.
THEY MAY BE IN SOME LOCATIONS
THAT THE SIGN SCIENTISTS ARE
NOT.
IT'S VERY VALUABLE.
BUT RIGHT NOW IT'S GOTTEN TO THE
POINT IN WHICH THERE ARE TOO
MANY PEOPLE OUT THERE.
WE TRY TO MAKE MEASUREMES WNTITH
OUR RADARS AND SOMETIMES WE
CAN'T FIND A PARKING SPACE IN A
VERY RURAL AREA.
SOMETIMES WE GET CAUGHT IN
TRAFFIC JAMS WHEN WE'RE TRYING
TO GET TO ANOTHER LOCATION AND
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT BECAUSE
THERE ARE SO MANY PEOPLE OUT
THERE.
ALSO THERE ARE A FEW PEOPLE OUT
THERE-- VERY FEW, FORTUNATELY--
WHO DRIVE NOT SAFELY.
SO I THINK THE REAL RISK IS
HAVING TOO MANY PEOPLE OUT
THERE.
>> Suarez: PROFESSOR BLUESTEIN
FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill:
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA MOVED TO FILL
THREE EMPTY SEATS ON A POWERFUL
FEDERAL APPEALS COURT, SETTING
UP A CONFRONTATION WITH SENATE
REPUBLICANS.
AND THE MILITARY'S TOP BRASS
DEFENDED THEMSELVES AGAINST
CHARGES THEY ARE DOING TOO
LITTLE ABOUT SEXUAL ASSAULTS.
BUT THEY OPPOSED A SENATE BILL
TO STRIP COMMANDERS OF AUTHORITY
OVER PROSECUTING SUCH CASES.
>> Brown: ONLINE, WE GOT A FLOOD
OF RESPONSES FROM OUR RECENT
REPORT OF STUDENT LOANS.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS THE DETAILS.
>> HolmanLAST:  WEEK, WHEN
PRESIDENT OBAMA STRESSED THE
MP
LOANS FROM DOUBLING, WE HEARD
FROM READERS ACROSS FACEBOOK AND
TWITTER.
YOU CAN JOIN THE DISCUSSION.
HAS STUDENT LOAN DEBT AFFECTED
YOUR POST-GRADUATE LIFE?
SEE OUR STORY ON THE RUNDOWN.
AND TODAY, IN ASK THE
HEADHUNTER, WHAT YOU SHOULD
NEVER, EVER DISCLOSE TO A
POTENTIAL EMPLOYER WHEN
DISCUSSING SALARY REQUIREMENTS.
THAT'S ON MAKING SENSE.
AND WE CONTINUE OUR LIVE CHAT
SERIES WITH THE NEWSHOUR'S
CORRESPONDENTS.
TOMORROW, TALK WITH JEFF BY
TWEETING NEWSHOUR WITH THE
HASHTAG #ASKJEFF.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JEFF?
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL HAVE
MARGARET WARNER'S NEXT REPORT ON
SECTARIAN STRIFE IN LEBANON.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.